The Thief
I was still a thief when I met Arun, and though I was only fifteen, I was an experienced and fairly
successful hand.
Arun was watching the wrestlers when I approached him. He was about twenty, a tall, lean fellow,
and he looked kind and simple enough for my purpose. I hadn’t had much luck of late, and thought I
might be able to get into this young person’s confidence. He seemed quite fascinated by the wrestling.
Two well-oiled men slid about in the soft mud, grunting and slapping their thighs. When I got Arun
into conversation he didn’t seem to realise I was a stranger.
‘You look like a wrestler yourself,’ I said.
‘So do you,’ he replied, which put me out of my stride for a moment, because at the time I was
rather thin and bony and not very impressive physically.
‘Yes,’ I said. ‘I wrestle sometimes.’
‘What’s your name?’
‘Deepak,’ I lied.
Deepak was about my fifth name. I had earlier called myself Ranbir, Sudhir, Trilok, and Surinder.
After this preliminary exchange, Arun confined himslf to comments on the match, and I didn’t have
much to say. After a while he walked away from the crowd of spectators. I followed him.
‘Hallo,’ he said. ‘Enjoying yourself?’
I gave him my most appealing smile. ‘I want to work for you,’ I said.
He didn’t stop walking. ‘And what makes you think I want someone to work for me?’
‘Well,’ I said, ‘I’ve been wandering about all day, looking for the best person to work for. When I
saw you, I knew that no one else had a chance.’
‘You flatter me,’ he said.
‘That’s all right.’
‘But you can’t work for me.’
‘Why not?’
‘Because I can’t pay you.’
I thought that over for a minute. Perhaps I had misjudged my man.
‘Can you feed me?’ I asked.
‘Can you cook?’ he countered.
‘I can cook,’ I lied.
‘If you can cook,’ he said, ‘I’ll feed you.’
He took me to his room and told me I could sleep in the verandah. But I was nearly back on the
street that night. The meal I cooked must have been pretty awful, because Arun gave it to the
neighbour’s cat and told me to be off. But I just hung around smiling in my most appealing way; and
then he couldn’t help laughing. He sat down on the bed and laughed for a full five minutes, and later
patted me on the head and said, never mind, he’d teach me to cook in the morning.
Not only did he teach me to cook, but he taught me to write my name and his, and said he would
soon teach me to write whole sentences, and add money on paper when you didn’t have any in your
pocket!
It was quite pleasant working for Arun. I made the tea in the morning and later went out shopping. I
would take my time buying the day’s supplies and made a profit of about 25 paise a day. I would tell
Arun that rice was 56 paise a pound (it generally was), but I would get it at 50 paise a pound. I think
he knew I made a little this way, but he didn’t mind, he wasn’t giving me a regular wage.
I was really grateful to Arun for teaching me to write. I knew that once I could write like an
educated man there would be no limit to what I could achieve. It might even be an incentive to be
honest.
Arun made money by fits and starts. He would be borrowing one week, lending the next. He would
keep worrying about his next cheque but, as soon as it arrived, he would go out and celebrate
lavishly.
One evening he came home with a wad of notes, and at night I saw him tuck the bundles under his
mattress, at the head of the bed.
I had been working for Arun for nearly a fortnight and, apart from the shopping, hadn’t done much
to exploit him. I had every opportunity for doing so. I had a key to the front door, which meant I had
access to the room whenever Arun was out. He was the most trusting person I had ever met. And that
was why I couldn’t make up my mind to rob him.
It’s easy to rob a greedy man, because he deserves to be robbed; it’s easy to rob a rich man,
because he can afford to be robbed; but it’s difficult to rob a poor man, even one who really doesn’t
care if he’s robbed. A rich man or a greedy man or a careful man wouldn’t keep his money under a
pillow or mattress, he’d lock it up in a safe place. Arun had put his money where it would be child’s
play for me to remove it without his knowledge.
It’s time I did some real work, I told myself; I’m getting out of practice … If I don’t take the money,
he’ll only waste it on his friends … He doesn’t even pay me …
Arun was asleep. Moonlight came in from the verandah and fell across the bed. I sat up on the
floor, my blanket wrapped round me, considering the situation. There was quite a lot of money in that
wad, and if I took it I would have to leave town — I might make the 10.30 express to Amritsar …
Slipping out of the blanket, I crept on all fours through the door and up to the bed, and peeped at
Arun. He was sleeping peacefully with a soft and easy breathing. His face was clear and unlined;
even I had more markings on my face, though mine were mostly scars.
My hand took on an identity of its own as it slid around under the mattress, the fingers searching for
the notes. They found them, and I drew them out without a crackle.
Arun sighed in his sleep and turned on his side, towards me. My free hand was resting on the bed,
and his hair touched my fingers.
I was frightened when his hair touched my fingers, and crawled quickly and quietly out of the room.
When I was in the street, I began to run. I ran down the bazaar road to the station. The shops were
all closed, but a few lights came from upper windows. I had the note at my waist, held there by the
string of my pyjamas. I felt I had to stop and count the notes though I knew it might make me late for
the train. It was already 10.20 by the clock tower. I slowed down to a walk, and my fingers flicked
through the notes. There were about a hundred rupees in fives. A good haul. I could live like a prince
for a month or two.
When I reached the station I did not stop at the ticket-office (I had never bought a ticket in my life)
but dashed straight on to the platform. The Amritsar Express was just moving out. It was moving
slowly enough for me to be able to jump on the foot-board of one of the carriages, but I hesitated for
some urgent, unexplainable reason.
I hesitated long enough for the train to leave without me.
When it had gone, and the noise and busy confusion of the platform had subsided, I found myself
standing alone on the deserted platform. The knowledge that I had a hundred stolen rupees in my
pyjamas only increased my feeling of isolation and loneliness. I had no idea where to spend the night;
I had never kept any friends, because sometimes friends can be one’s undoing; I didn’t want to make
myself conspicuous by staying at a hotel. And the only person I knew really well in town was the
person I had robbed!
Leaving the station, I walked slowly through the bazaar keeping to dark, deserted alleys. I kept
thinking of Arun. He would still be asleep, blissfully unaware of his loss.
I have made a study of men’s faces when they have lost something of material value. The greedy
man shows panic, the rich man shows anger, the poor man shows fear; but I knew that neither panic
nor anger nor fear would show on Arun’s face, when he discovered the theft; only a terrible sadness
not for the loss of the money but for my having betrayed his trust.
I found myself on the maidan and sat down on a bench with my feet tucked up under my haunches.
The night was a little cold, and I regretted not having brought Arun’s blanket along. A light drizzle
added to my discomfort. Soon it was raining heavily. My shirt and pyjamas stuck to my skin and a
cold wind brought the rain whipping across my face. I told myself that sleeping on a bench was
something, I should have been used to by now, but the verandah had softened me.
I walked back to the bazaar and sat down on the step of a closed shop. A few vagrants lay beside
me, rolled up tight in thin blankets. The clock showed midnight, I felt for the notes; they were still
with me, but had lost their crispness and were damp with rainwater.
Arun’s money. In the morning he would probably have given me a rupee to go to the pictures but
now I had it all. No more cooking his meals, running to the bazaar, or learning to write whole
sentences. Whole sentences …
They were something I had forgotten in the excitement of a hundred rupees. Whole sentences, I
knew, could one day bring me more than a hundred rupees. It was a simple matter to steal (and
sometimes just as simple to be caught) but to be a really big man, a wise and successful man, that was
something. I should go back to Arun, I told myself, if only to learn how to write.
Perhaps it was also concern for Arun that drew me back; a sense of sympathy is one of my
weaknesses, and through hesitation over a theft I had often been caught. A successful thief must be
pitiless. I was fond of Arun. My affection for him, my sense of sympathy, but most of all my desire to
write whole sentences, drew me back to the room.
I hurried back to the room extremely nervous, for it is easier to steal something than to return it
undetected. If I was caught beside the bed now, with the money in my hand, or with my hand under the
mattress there could be only one explanation: that I was actually stealing. If Arun woke up, I would be
lost.
I opened the door clumsily, then stood in the doorway in clouded moonlight. Gradually my eyes
became accustomed to the darkness of the room. Arun was still asleep. I went on all fours again and
crept noiselessly to the head of the bed. My hand came up with the notes. I felt his breath on my
fingers. I was fascinated by his tranquil features and easy breathing and remained motionless for a
minute. Then my hand explored the mattress, found the edge, slipped under it with the notes.
I awoke late next morning to find that Arun had already made the tea. I found it difficult to face him
in the harsh light of day. His hand was stretched out towards me. There was a five-rupee note
between his fingers. My heart sank.
‘I made some money yesterday,’ he said. ‘Now you’ll get paid regularly.’ My spirit rose as rapidly
as they had fallen. I congratulated myself on having returned the money.
But when I took the note, I realised that he knew everything. The note was still wet from last night’s
rain.
‘Today I’ll teach you to write a little more than your name,’ he said.
He knew; but neither his lips nor his eyes said anything about their knowing.
I smiled at Arun in my most appealing way; and the smile came by itself, without my knowing it.